Jorge Luis Borges
The Babylon Lottery

Like all men in Babylon I have been a proconsul; like all, a slave; I
have also known omnipotence, opprobrium, jail. Look: the index finger
of my right hand is missing. Look again: through this rent in my cape
you can see a ruddy tatoo on my belly. It is the second symbol, Beth.
This letter, on nights of full moon, gives me power over men whose mark
is Ghimel; but it also subordinates me to those marked Aleph, who on
moonless nights owe obedience to those marked Ghimel. In a cellar at
dawn, I have severed the jugular vein of sacred bulls against a black
rock. During one lunar year, I have been declared invisible: I shrieked
and was not heard, I stole my bread and was not decapitated. I have
known what the Greeks did not: uncertainty. In a bronze chamber, faced
with the silent handkerchief of a strangler, hope has been faithful to
me; in the river of delights, panic has not failed me. Heraclitus of
Pontica admiringly relates that Pythagoras recalled having been Pyrrho,
and before that Euphorbus, and before that some other mortal. In order
to recall analogous vicissitudes I do not need to have recourse to
death, nor even to imposture.
I owe this almost atrocious variety to an institution which other
republics know nothing about, or which operates among them imperfectly
and in secret: the lottery. I have not delved into its history; I do
know that the wizards have been unable to come to any agreement; of its
powerful designs I know what a man not versed in astrology might know
of the moon. I come from a vertiginous country where the lottery forms
a principal part of reality: until this very day I have thought about
all this as little as I have about the behavior of the indecipherable
gods or about the beating of my own heart. Now, far from Babylon and
its beloved customs, I think of the lottery with some astonishment and
ponder the blasphemous conjectures murmured by men in the shadows at
twilight.
My father related that anciently - a matter of centuries; of years? -
the lottery in Babylon was a game of plebeian character. He said (I do
not know with what degree of truth) that barbers gave rectangular bits
of bone or decorated parchment in exchange for copper coins. A drawing
of the lottery was held in the middle of the day: the winners received,
without further corroboration from chance, silverminted coins. The
procedure, as you see, was elemental.
Naturally, these "lotteries" failed. Their moral virtue was nil. They
did not appeal to all the faculties of men: only to their hope. In the
face of public indifference, the merchants who established these venal
lotteries began to lose money. Someone attempted to introduce a slight
reform: the interpolation of a certain small number of adverse outcomes
among the favored numbers. By means of this reform, the purchasers of
numbered rectangles stood the double chance of winning a sum or of
paying a fine often considerable in size. This slight danger - for each
thirty favored numbers there would be one adverse number - awoke, as
was only natural, the public's interest. The Babylonians gave
themselves up to the game. Anyone who did not acquire lots was looked
upon as pusillanimous, mean-spirited. In time, this disdain multiplied.
The person who did not play was despised, but the losers who paid the
fine were also scorned. The Company (thus it began to be known at that
time) was forced to take measures to protect the winners, who could not
collect their prizes unless nearly the entire amount of the fines was
already collected. The Company brought suit against the losers: the
judge condemned them to pay the original fine plus costs or to spend a
number of days in jail. Every loser chose jail, so as to defraud the
Company. It was from this initial bravado of a few men that the all-
powerful position of the Company - its ecclesiastical, metaphysical
strength - was derived.
A short while later, the reports on the drawings omitted any
enumeration of fines and limited themselves to publishing the jail
sentences corresponding to each adverse number. This laconism, almost
unnoticed at the time, became of capital importance. It constituted the
first appearance in the lottery of non-pecuniary elements. Its success
was great. Pushed to such a measure by the players, the Company found
itself forced to increase its adverse numbers.
No one can deny that the people of Babylonia are highly devoted to
logic, even to symmetry. It struck them as incoherent that the
fortunate numbers should be computed in round figures of money while
the unfortunate should be figured in terms of days and nights in jail.
Some moralists argued that the possession of money does not determine
happiness and that other forms of fortune are perhaps more immediate.
There was another source of restlessness in the lower depths. The
members of the sacerdotal college multiplied the stakes and plumbed the
vicissitudes of terror and hope; the poor, with reasonable or
inevitable envy, saw themselves excluded from this notoriously
delicious exhiliration. The just anxiety of all, poor and rich alike,
to participate equally is the lottery, inspired an indignant agitation,
the memory of which the years have not erased. Certain obstinate souls
did not comprehend, or pretended not to comprehend, that a new order
had come, a necessary historical stage . . . A slave stole a crimson
ticket, a ticket which earned him the right to have his tongue burned
in the next drawing. The criminal code fixed the same penalty for the
theft of a ticket. A number of Babylonians argued that he deserved a
red-hot poker by virtue of the theft; others, more magnanimous, held
that the public executioner should apply the penalty of the lottery,
since chance had so determined . . .
Disturbances broke out, there was a lamentable shedding of blood; but
the people of Babylon imposed their will at last, over the opposition
of the rich. That is: the people fully achieved their magnanimous ends.
In the first place, it made the Company accept complete public power.
(This unification was necessary, given the vastness and complexity of
the new operations.) In the second place, it forced the lottery to be
secret, free, and general. The sale of tickets for money was abolished.
Once initiated into the mysteries of Bel, every free man automatically
participated in the sacred drawings of lots, which were carried out in
the labyrinths of the gods every seventy nights and which determined
every man's fate until the next exercise. The consequences were
incalculable. A happy drawing might motivate his elevation to the
council of wizards or his condemnation to the custody of an enemy
(notorious or intimate), or to find, in the peaceful shadows of a room,
the woman who had begun to disquiet him or whom he had never expected
to see again. An adverse drawing might mean mutilation, a varied
infamy, death. Sometimes a single event - the tavern killing of C, the
mysterious glorification of B - might be the brilliant result of thirty
or forty drawings. But it must be recalled that the individuals of the
Company were (and are) all-powerful and astute as well. In many cases,
the knowledge that certain joys were the simple doing of chance might
have detracted from their exellence; to avoid this inconvenience the
Company's agents made use of suggestion and magic. Their moves, their
management, were secret. In the investigation of people's intimate
hopes and intimate terrors, they made use of astrologers and spies.
There were certain stone lions, there was a sacred privy called Qaphqa,
there were fissures in a dusty aqueduct which, according to general
opinion, lead to the Company; malign or benevolent people deposited
accusations in these cracks. These denunciations were incorporated into
an alphabetical archive of variable veracity.
Incredibly enough, there were still complaints. The Company, with its
habitual discretion, did not reply directly. It preferred to scribble a
brief argument - which now figures among sacred scriptures - in the
debris of a mask factory. That doctrinal piece of literature observed
that the lottery is an interpolation of chance into the order of the
world and that to accept errors is not to contradict fate but merely to
corroborate it. It also observed that those lions and that sacred
recipient, though not unauthorized by the Company (which did not
renounce the right to consult them), functioned without official
guaranty.
This declaration pacified the public unease. It also produced other
effects, not foreseen by the author. It deeply modified the spirit and
operations of the Company. (I have little time left to tell what I
know; we have been warned that the ship is ready to sail; but I will
attempt to explain it.)
Improbable as it may be, no one had until then attempted to set up a
general theory of games. A Babylonian is not highly speculative. He
reveres the judgments of fate, he hands his life over to them, he
places his hopes, his panic terror in them, but it never occurs to him
to investigate their labyrinthian laws nor the giratory spheres which
disclose them. Nevertheless, the unofficial declaration which I have
mentioned inspired many discussions of a juridico-mathematical nature.
From one of these discussions was born the following conjecture: if the
lottery is an intensification of chance, a periodic infusion of chaos
into the cosmos, would it not be desirable for chance to intervene at
all stages of the lottery and not merely in the drawing? Is it not
ridiculous for chance to dictate the death of someone, while the
circumstances of his death-its silent reserve or publicity, the time
limit of one hour or one centuryshould remain immune to hazard? These
eminently just scruples finally provoked a considerable reform, whose
complexities (intensified by the practice of centuries) are not
understood except by a handful of specialists, but which I will attempt
to summarize, even if only in a symbolic manner.
Let us imagine a first drawing, which eventuates in a sentence of death
against some individual. To carry out the sentence, another drawing is
set up, and this drawing proposes (let us say) nine possible
executioners. Of these executioners, four can initiate a third drawing
which will reveal the name of the actual executioner, two others can
replace the adverse order with a fortunate order (the finding of a
treasure, let us say), another may exacerbate the death sentence (that
is: make it infamous or enrich it with torture), still others may
refuse to carry it out . . .
Such is the symbolic scheme. In reality, the number of drawings is
infinite. No decision is final, all diverge into others. The ignorant
suppose that an infinite number of drawings require an infinite amount
of time; in reality, it is quite enough that time be infinitely
subdivisible, as is the case in the famous parable of the Tortoise and
the Hare. This infinitude harmonizes in an admirable manner with the
sinuous numbers of Chance and of the Celestial Archetype of the Lottery
adored by the Platonists . . .
A certain distorted echo of our ritual seems to have resounded along
the Tiber: Aelius Lampridius, in his Life of Antoninus Heliogabalus,
tells of how this emperor wrote down the lot of his guests on
seashells, so that one would receive ten pounds of gold and another ten
flies, ten dormice, ten bears. It is only right to remark that
Heliogabalus was educated in Asia Minor, among the priests of the
eponymous god.
There are also impersonal drawings, of undefined purpose: one drawing
will decree that a sapphire from Taprobane be thrown into the waters of
the Euphrates; another, that a bird be released from a tower roof;
another, that a grain of sand be withdrawn (or added) to the
innumerable grains on a beach. The consequences, sometimes, are
terrifying.
Under the beneficent influence of the Company, our customs have become
thoroughly impregnated with chance. The buyer of a dozen amphoras of
Damascus wine will not be surprised if one of them contains a talisman
or a viper. The scribe who draws up a contract scarcely ever fails to
introduce some erroneous datum; I myself, in making this hasty
declaration, have falsified or invented some grandeur, some atrocity;
perhaps, too, a certain mysterious monotony . . .
Our historians, the most discerning in the world, have invented a
method for correcting chance. It is well known that the operations of
this method are (in general) trustworthy; although, naturally, they are
not divulged without a measure of deceit. In any case, there is nothing
so contaminated with fiction as the history of the Company . . .
A paleographic document, unearthed in a temple, may well be the work of
yesterday's drawing or that of one lasting a century. No book is ever
published without some variant in each copy. Scribes take a secret oath
to omit, interpolate, vary.
The Company, with divine modesty, eludes all publicity. Its agents, as
is only natural, are secret. The orders which it is continually sending
out do not differ from those lavishly issued by imposters. Besides, who
can ever boast of being a mere imposter? The inebriate who improvises
an absurd mandate, the dreamer who suddenly awakes to choke the woman
who lies at his side to death, do they not both, perhaps, carry out a
secret decision by the Company? This silent functioning, comparable to
that of God, gives rise to all manner of conjectures. One of them, for
instance, abominably insinuates that the Company is eternal and that it
will last until the last night of the world, when the last god
annihilates the cosmos. Still another conjecture declares that the
Company is omnipotent, but that it exerts its influence only in the
most minute matters: in a bird's cry, in the shades of rust and the
hues of dust, in the cat naps of dawn. There is one conjecture, spoken
from the mouths of masked heresiarchs, to the effect that the Company
has never existed and never will. A conjecture no less vile argues that
it is indifferently inconsequential to affirm or deny the reality of
the shadowy corporation, because Babylon is nothing but an infinite
game of chance.
